CATIE PODCAST-Charles Patrick

Welcome to Katie chronicles stories of innovation and excellence in education across the Texas A&M system, where learning technologies, innovative trends, and digital accessibility converge. Today's guest is Charles Patrick, director, Undergraduate Programs, Biomedical Engineering, Texas A&M College Station. Welcome to another episode of The Katie Chronicles the stories of innovation and excellence in education across the A&M system. I'm your host, Sunny Elsohly. Today for our. Our guest is Charles Patrick, who is a faculty member in biomedical engineering. And he's done some very interesting work in using technology across across the curriculum. He has broad experience in industry and in teaching, and he's here to share some of his ideas of how we can enhance student learning in those fields with us. So, Charles, welcome. Thank you. Happy to be here. I'm glad you have taken the time to join us. I know these are very busy times and middle of grading and whatnot, so I'm doubly thankful that you've taken the time to be here with us. Excited to be here to talk with you. So let's start with you telling us a little bit about yourself, the courses you teach and your background. Sure. So my I'm in biomedical engineering department. Um, been here at A&M since twenty nineteen, uh, graduated at Rice University with my PhD and did a postdoc there as well, and then worked at MD Anderson Cancer Center for thirteen years and was director of research programs there and head of the Department of Biomedical Engineering there, and then left there to be director of operations and vice president of Southwestern Seminary in Fort Worth, was there for about ten years and was a professor there teaching the science classes as well, and then wanted to get back to students. You know, I've been in administration so long for like twenty three years, wanted to get back to the students. So the position opened up here at A&M to help the bioengineering department, uh, teach their classes. It also helped develop a new curricula and develop engineering education in the department. And so I said, that sounds perfect. And so they keep trying to pull me back in administration a little bit, but that's okay, as long as I still get to teach the students and interact with them. So having fun with all that, I think that's the modus operandi in most places, right? Is that if you're really good at what you do, they want to pull you into administration. Yes. But the flip side of that is possibly that in administration, perhaps you can influence more things that will help people like you who have a strong commitment to learning and excellence. So that's just something to think about on the other side of it. So, so tell us about this project that you are implementing. Yeah. So I have been a professor now for what, thirty one years and have just been watching how students learn, um, and have been a little concerned with, um, the lack of imagination competency and engineering students over the years. And then that, coupled with the fact that they're they're faced with such complex data nowadays with internet knowledge increasing every twelve hours, human knowledge increasing every twelve years. I mean, when a student enters A and M and they matriculate after four years, I mean, they've had three thousand increase, three thousand fold increase in internet knowledge by the time they graduate and eight fold increase in human knowledge. And, and, um, and so they're forced with, confronted with all that complex data, um, and understanding how to understand it and scientific visualization and so forth. And, um, I've been concerned about us being able to develop teaching pedagogy that really uses technology to teach well, um, using AR, VR holograms, so forth, uh, using that technology. They're, they're being exposed to when they graduate from here. Um, but I don't think we've been doing as good a job as we can preparing them here, uh, in college years. And it's just not unanimous throughout the United States, right? It's not a one university problem. Um, and so I've been really intrigued always with technology, um, and wanting to use technology to teach well to help students increase their engagement and their learning. That was kind of the modus operandi of why I was interested in these projects. Uh, that's pretty interesting because you mentioned, it almost seems to me it sounds like we bring students in and at the end of the four years, um, they are in a way almost behind where they should be, not in terms of knowledge or maybe in terms of knowledge, because knowledge has increased eight fold by the time they have graduated. And we are still teaching them old ways of doing things. So it strikes me that what you seem to be trying to achieve is this balance of using technology to introduce them to what you have. I think it's a term that industry four point zero and education four point zero, and make them a bit more resilient and in finding new ways of learning, so they keep themselves updated no matter what. Is that a reasonably fair encapsulation? I would agree that I think part of our engineering education is to ensure that they are lifelong learners, right? That they remain agile. Correct. Correct. Correct. So, um, you know, immersive in a work in immersive technologies, you have obviously figured out that industry uses this a lot. And so therefore we need to do something with the students. So they are used to using these technologies and have some fluency in them. So for your project, you have envisioned a VR immersive VR project or AR. I'm going to just call you loosely use the term XR actually for it. Very good. And so tell us a little bit more about the project and what you hope to achieve with it in terms of the outcomes. Okay. So this project is through the Innovative Teaching Fellows program that the provost has started, uh, with, uh, Michael Johnson, uh, associate provost overseeing part of it and Clint Patterson and CTE overseeing part of it as well. And my part. My project is focused on using, let's say, XR modalities to enhance student learning and engagement. And so I've designed a project where I call it what the elite, right? Engineering, learning through immersive technologies, environment. And the first step is using a VR application. It's called Anatomage. It's a VR table that has been preloaded with different cadavers. And the students can, in virtual reality, look at every aspect of organs and tissues, fluid flow and things in the cadaver. And at the same time, they can take whatever medical devices they develop in senior capstone design and import them into the cadaver to see how things fit. What are the pinch points? What doesn't work? And so they can continue to, you know, innovate and ideate on their projects. And so getting the students to be involved with that virtual reality. And so created a project where students are in the design class with me, and I break the class up into two parts, and one time the one portion has to design a medical device using just standard anatomy pictures and so forth, and the other group actually gets to use the VR table. And then next week we flip it. And so the other group that was looking at an original anatomy images gets to use VR table and vice versa. And I measured their adoption of VR technology and just got the last survey back last week. And so in the middle of crunching the data, but just anecdotally looking at the, the raw data looks like there was improvement of them. They were really excited about adopting the VR technology. We're very fast and agile with it. It actually helped them learn and, and ideate on their project and then also measure their imagination competency before and after classes as well. And also just anecdotally, just because like we just finished getting the data, but anecdotally, it looks like their imagination competency went up as well. And so these tools help to engage them, help them ideate well, but also spark their imagination, which is what we want to do as engineers. I think that is that is very interesting because, um, the study, there have been studies in the past that have looked at using immersive technologies for, especially for AP classes. Right. And even I remember I'm old enough to remember the Adam project and even the old Adam project and CD-ROMs, just having people being able to explore those at will rather than just being in a cadaver with a cadaver for a few hours, really showed a huge amount of gains in their knowledge of A and B, and in fact, they retained it. That was a critical thing of that study, that the retention of knowledge was what was critical. I took an AP course, and I doubt if I can identify too many things anymore, because that was thirty years ago. Um, but the resiliency is what is, is happening. Resilience of information has become critical. What I find very interesting is you mentioned that, and I can see that now when you're talking about how having access when devising medical, coming with medical devices, um, having access to a three dimensional model. Yes. Has become the critical part to them, understanding how these devices are going to interact with the human body versus a 2D where you have to use a lot of imagination. Correct. But now, so I flipped the question and say, do you think it was actually the engagement with the 2D, which actually helped them with the imagination versus a 3D model? Great question. Um, I of course would love to speculate and say it was the VR model, right? But I again, I haven't teased out that data yet. Um, but I do know they want, as I was watching and just observed outside, as they were watching the classroom, I could tell they were more engaged with the VR model. Uh, turning things around, diving in, learning the anatomy rather than just looking at 2D image. And so Just anecdotally, without looking at the data so far, I would say, um, I think it did spark their imagination more looking at using the VR models. Um, you know, the data are going to be very interesting to look at and no doubt about it. And I'm sure that you observed the students working on this because, um, and when you use this, this adoption model. So you, did you use the technology adoption model to see how they are reacting to adopting the technology? Okay, so you, the Tam showed, uh, the improvements over both those processes, right? Okay. And then so the sequencing sequencing was that you had half the class working on a 2D model. Yes. Half the class using an immersive model. And then they switched and they switched. And did you administer the, the innovation scale. Imagination scale. Um, before and after pre-post or how was that done? The imagination scale was at the beginning of the semester, and at the end of semester when they were doing this project. So, okay, because we had several things in class that sparked imagination beyond just this project. Um, and so, um, yeah, so I did it before and post of the semester. So, so tell us a bit more about the creativity. Why is, why is creativity so critical? Critical and imagination so critical in engineering disciplines? It is. And if you look at the over the last couple of years, the number two. Qualification that employers want of engineers is imagination. It was number ten and that was moved to number two. Um, and if you look at what we do with students, I mean, we do a lot in K through twelve with Stem education, right? Enhancing their imagination, imagination, getting excited and so forth. And then when they get to get here in college, we do a lot giving them knowledge and skills and so forth. And then we forget, I think sometimes to spark that imagination until they get to capstone design, and then we expect them to be completely imaginative, you know, their senior year. And I just think we need to do a better job of making sure that we're we are increasing their imagination and competency throughout the entire four years. Uh, that's a very great point because, uh, I think Sir Ken Robinson used to talk about that a lot in the K-12 system. Right. And he would talk about this idea that we have them play in the first two years of their school, and then as they rise up in the ranks, we tell them, nope, that's not the way to do it. This is a process, and you must follow the process and show me the process. Um, and there's some interesting data that show that sometimes knowing the process is critical, but at what point do you let them explore beyond the process, I think is what where you are trying to get to right is that nobody's saying don't learn how to solve the equation, but then can you present the results of that equation in a very much more interesting way to me? Exactly, exactly. And or use it in a creative way. Right. Um, to solve problems. Correct. And so in your, in your, in these creative modes that you have seen the students work on. What has been the most creative project you have seen come from a student right now after they've. Yeah. So, and one of my other classes where I. Trying to increase their imagination. It was a bio inspired design class using nature inspired aspects and teaching them that. And I basically, I gave them each, each team, two boxes of Legos and said, okay, here's the prop clinical problem. Use nature to inspire a design concept and then use Legos to build it. And they had a blast doing it, but you should have seen what they developed. I mean, they were developed working prototypes within an hour and a half's time out of Legos that mimicked what was happening in nature to solve a medical problem. Wow. That was exciting to see. And you know, Lego has that serious play. Oh, yes. Yes mantra. That's great. And it works. I mean, the students were very creative and it was it was fun for me as an instructor to see their creativity, but they were still doing critical thinking. They were still doing systems integration. They were are still applying new knowledge, but doing it in a creative way to solve a medical problem. That's amazing. I know, I'm curious. I'm fascinated by this now. Did you by any chance have a documentation of this any website we can go to? So I'm putting the paper together. We can do one of my summer tasks is to put that paper together. So I have all the data, as you said. This timing. We just finished the semester. Yes. So I need to breathe for about a week. And then yes, we're going to be working on the paper and publish that. That's fantastic. So the next part you talk I want you also have talked about this idea of being able to create a transferable framework using your work, because it's not obviously just biomedical engineering that's going to benefit from this work. Correct. And we need to be able to have some kind of transferable framework that helps other engineering disciplines. So how do you envisage that happening? Yeah. So one of two ways. Um, one way is, is built in with the innovative teaching fellows program where we are developing a new classroom of the future in Harrington Tower, where it's full of technology, where faculty can come in and use the technology and learn how to use it to teach, increase student engagement, learning and so forth. And so that's one way of scaling it to all multiple departments and so forth, is creating a teaching laboratory with technology and where you marry the technology with pedagogy and then transfer that to faculty in the future. The other is again, trying to develop these frameworks where it can be transferred to any faculty or any discipline. And there would be, I would say, transferability, transferability of ideas are important. Right? And so I think there's three things that faculty need to really keep in focus when they're wanting to do this, one of which is scalability, right? So A and M, we have large classes and some things work well in small classrooms, um, ten, twelve students. But then you can't scale it right effectively to. I teach classes that have one hundred and seventy students in it. Engineering students in it. And so thinking about scalability in terms of numbers of students, in terms of accessibility and in terms of a digital divide with students. Right. I can't go ask students all to buy a quest VR headset, right. Not everybody can afford it. It's not effective and it's just not efficient. And that's not the right way to go. Second thing would be student expectations. Uh, we live in a world where students are surrounded by a realistic CGI graphics all the time, and that's what they expect when we say we're going to do XR, VR technology and present it to them, and they don't want to see anything as a technical term. Hokey, right? They don't think they are. They're used to seeing what they see in the cinematic movies, and they forget to look at the credits at the end and see, that takes thousands of people to develop those things, right? And so it's hard for you have to be realistic that a single faculty member can't produce something at that level, right? So at the very least, you're going to have a small team, right? Correct. Software and technology and pedagogical content and so forth to develop something. So keeping that expectations in mind. And then third, probably the most important, at least for me, is don't let the tail wag the dog. Ah, yes. And so a lot of times I see faculty take technology and they want, they just want to use that piece of cool technology and try to insert it and push it into their teaching. The teaching has to drive the technology, right? So the pedagogy should always be first. So I have this teaching pedagogy. Okay. Now what technology can you help me teach this well? How do I increase the learning styles this way and so forth. So being careful, don't let the tail wag the dog. That is the third point I think you mentioned is extremely critical. And we see that a lot where people come up with the coolest thing they have seen and say, how do I make fit this into what I'm doing right now? And you are absolutely correct. It's great to hear you say that too, is these these are things that technology has been fighting, especially in higher ed for a long time. Yes. Um, it's the idea that you need to very thoughtfully and carefully integrate the technology into your course to make sure that you have a specific learning enhancement across your course. Right. And not just play with something because it's fun to do. Exactly. Because the fun to do is part. I'm not saying we should not have fun when you're teaching, but at the same time, um, the issues of scalability and access come up. Yes. So speaking about access, VR technologies are yet one of the big barriers right now still for accessibility. Yes. And, and accessibility. I don't mean affordability. I'm talking about accessibility. So if somebody has, you know, any issues with vision or anything else, it still turns into a problem. So how are you working your way around that problem? Yeah. So it is a legitimate problem. And also, you know, about a third of the population just doesn't do VR well. Right. Just physiologically. And um, they have limitations and problems, so forth with that. So I think um. AR is an easier problem to solve. Um, just have that mixed reality and augmented reality is easier problem to achieve. And students do well with that. VR as you said, there are some limitations with that. And I think the technology is getting better to alleviate some of those things. Like this VR table alleviates all those things because nobody has to wear a headset. They're just sitting around a table, a large table that has a virtual reality model in front of it. Hologram would be the same way, right? Well, you're just visualizing a hologram in front of you. You're not having to wear anything. And so when we can get to that stage where we can do it large scale, then I think VR will have more applications for what we're doing that that's a that's, that's the direction we need to be moving to. Right? Is this idea of I mean, we think of Star Trek and holograms and really, it really is going to be the future for us because you don't need a headset when you're immersed in in the space itself. You don't go to the classroom. You go to the holodeck, you go to the holodeck. That's correct. Very true. Or in this case, this advanced classroom technology classroom you're building on campus, which is going to help people with all these issues. The second challenge we always think through is, and you mentioned that when we were talking about the project, is the accessibility accessibility in terms of affordability? Yes. And how do you solve for that challenge? It's a big challenge. And, you know, it's always a balance between the investment that it takes to learn better. And if that learning is really you keep it, keep it with you for a long time. It's probably a valuable investment. But still, even with affordable new meta headsets, it's still not exactly affordable. No, it is not for majority of the student population. And nor do we want to, you know, impact them with more fees to do those. You know, we had a generous former student who who donated money for this anatomage table. It's an expensive thing, right? Um, and we're thankful for that. Uh, there is a next stage where we can then subscribe and students can then look at the VR models on their own laptop. Oh, yes. And every student can then can have basically a VR table in front of them in the classroom. And that's going to be our next stage to do that. Um, again, we're not, we don't want to transfer fees to the students. So that's where our lovely donors come in and play right now until we get technology more affordable or more ubiquitous for students is, uh, those mechanisms, right? So now putting on our dreaming hat, since you've been involved in this industry for a long time, thirty, thirty five years of experience in industry and in teaching, um, give us your best guess at when do you think we might actually be able to make holographic technologies much more affordable and easily accessible? Because I think that's the holy grail, right? Yes. If we can get past VR headsets and so forth, and just have the holograms with the visual acuity we need and dynamic and real time. Um, that's the holy grail, right? And technology is occurring so quickly and changing quickly. I'm hoping we get there sooner than later. Um, but if I put my crystal ball, I think we're at least twenty years right from that. Okay. Where it's applicable to, say, putting in the classroom. Right. Uh, there may be smaller units where we can say we just create a technology hub or a learning classroom, but people come and use it, right? But putting one in every classroom, I think we're at least twenty years or so away. Um, I hope that that timeline collapses. Me too, me too. I just had another birthday last week, so I hope it collapses as well because I would love to see it. Um, so last last bit I would as we come towards the close of this, um, what advice would you have for people who want to start a project like this. It can seem daunting and always there's this old adage, right? How do you eat an elephant? Take the first bite. So what? What advice would you have for people who want to start a similar project? Yeah, I would say start small. Um, for four hundred dollars. Now you can buy a camera that captures VR video, right? And there's free software or affordable software you can use to play with that, to start putting together VR movies of the lab experiments that you're trying to teach. Correct, correct. Um, things that are more complicated, like, uh, nuclear reactors, as we've talked about, or blood flow in the heart or something like that. It's going to take a team approach, right where you take, uh, scientific visualization experts, software individuals, engineers, all working together. And we, I think we have some of that at the human, the visual performance arts college here. Uh, there are some teams there that I think we can touch bases with to help with some of this, but think small first, and then think about building a small team collaboration and moving forward from there. That's, that's a really good advice. So this is this is an advice that we hear from a lot of people who do interesting things like you, which is always start small. Yes, it's the big projects sound very interesting, but starting small is what gives you some quick wins and at least lets you test your ideas of whether it's working or not. Absolutely. Going forward. And it gives you that preliminary data we all need for grants, right? Yeah, absolutely. Um, and now talk about the role of assessment in this whole thing. Because assessment obviously is becomes critical. And learning assessment is notoriously tough thing actually not as easy as what people think it is. Yeah. You're correct. I mean assessment of technology adoption technology use using validated methods, um are important. So I would say as you're looking at doing your technology transfer into your classroom and so forth, look already for validated models that are out there and published. Don't don't take the time right now to to learn all the engineering education background. It's a different, um, different field, right? But go ahead and use validated models that are already out there if you can, uh, to get started. All right. And then later on, as you become more of an expert in your area, you can develop your own surveys and instruments and validate them yourselves. But there's no need to go through that at the very beginning because there's already, um, applicable assessment models for adoption and for classroom assessment already out there. Correct. So just do your literature survey and so forth and find those that have already been validated and used by multiple people. What takeaway would you like the listeners to get from this when they listen to this episode? I would say two things. One, don't be scared of the technology, right? It's here. Uh, our students are digital natives. And I mean, one of the survey results we got back, uh, as I looked at it last week, was the student said, we want more of it. Ah, they're excited about it. They want more of VR applications and AR applications. So, um, it's what they're expecting right. And then two um, second thing is I lost my thought. What was my second thing, um, is to just jump in. Right. Yeah. Um, because I. We have to do this, right. Education is changing. Correct. Uh, we have to meet the students where they are actually be ahead of the students, right as they're preparing for the workforce. And I feel like we're already a little behind. Right. Um, and I would like us to get a little closer to what they're going to be facing when they leave the workforce and companies who can buy full VR rooms and so forth. Um, but they would at least have, have experience with it and understanding how to view the data, uh, know where the pinch points are and so forth in AR or VR, XR, uh, that, that's, uh, that good, Good takeaways there. Charles. Thank you for coming in. Sure. I've got some takeaways. I realized that for us to be hand in with industry is it probably needs to be a much stronger nexus with industry partnerships. And A&M, I think is one of the places where we actually do have a lot of strong industry partnerships more than other places. I think maybe that's my imagination, but I seem to think so always. But it becomes critical to introduce students to what's happening in industry. Absolutely. And, um, and then there are a piece of advice that resonates always with, with start small, don't be scared of the technologies, embrace them, find the correct place to put them in. Yes, start small and think big. That's exactly right. Perfect. Thank you for coming in, Charles. This is really interesting. Thank you. Podcast studio and production services provided by Engineering Studio for advanced instruction and learning.